---
layout: post
title: "Raduim's Design"
date: 2024-02-09 16:17:00 -0400
categories: design
---

# Overall Design Goals

1. This should be a layered system. The higher level components and systems should rely on the lower level ones, not the other way around. For example, take a sprite. At a high level we are dealing with a `Sprite2D`. This relies on a `Texture2D` which might rely on a `GLuint` texture ID or `ID3D11Texture`.

2. Low coupling - for the most part, components and systems should be able to exist independently of most others. This will
    - Increase testability
    - Decrease maintenence and help with debugging

    Of course there are always exceptions. For example, later in development,
    you will see that the `Resource` and it's `ResourceManager` are somewhat tightly coupled. A resource *can* exist without the `ResourceManager` and will work just fine, but the lack of an available `ResourceManager` might lead to resource leaks.

3. Composition over Inheritence. Inheritence should be limited and multiple-inheritance is not an option. This will increase intellectual overhead and make debugging and maintenence a nightmare. Not only that, it could lead to resource leaks if you are not careful (e.g. [The Deadly Diamond](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_inheritance#The_diamond_problem))

    As of this writing, the engine is ~5500 LOC, and inheritence is only used in two areas.

# Platform Independence Design Goals
This engine should run on Windows and Linux while supporting OpenGL and DirectX 11. Thus we will need to think carefully about how we design this.

Two things are true in relation to platform independence:
1. Only one operating system will run the application at a time (a given)
2. Only one graphics API will be present in each build

This means platform independence will be as simple as a few `#ifdef` macros and some build-system support.

Operating System specific code is placed in the `/platform` directory.
Graphics API specific code is under `/renderer`.

High level code should have no idea what API/OS it is using.


## Design of the Core

The core engine contains a template library, debugging, logging, math, thread, types, and IO support.
Each of these has it's own directory.

At the very lowest level is the template library. Almost every component relies on this.
The design is similar to that of the STL.

The core should act more as a library than anything else. Exceptions might be code for the Application class.

If I want to open a file, I can just use `/core/io/file.h`.
If I want to have a hash map I can just use `/core/rtl/hash_map.h`.

It should not be coupled with ANY other component in the entire engine. NO exceptions.

## Design of the Resource Manager

The Resource Manager is a server. Perhaps it ought to have it's name changed. It is responsible for holding a table containg resource IDs, resource data (raw bytes), and actual resources (e.g. an Image).

This is one of a few select places Singletons are used. This is because debugging singletons is a nightmare (see the resource manager section). That and unit-testing them can be god awful.

Why use a singleton? The resource manager should be access from anywhere. If I want to load a resource, I should have an entire resource manager passed by reference into some random function in some random class. 

I have adhered to the overall design goals here: the Resource Manager can be turned into something other than a singleton and I won't have to make many changes. The changes I would have to make (other than to the Resource Manager itself) would be to the `Resource` base class which interacts with the resource manager via the `::get()` method.

## Design of the Renderer
This excellent if somewhat snarky [article](https://alextardif.com/RenderingAbstractionLayers.html) by Alex Tardif is what I am basing the renderer's design on.

It should be composed of a Device class (e.g. an OpenGL Context or DirectX device) and classes representing general components such as Buffers and Shaders.
Really that is the core of any rendering system. A buffer holds resources like texture, meshes, indexes, etc. A shader takes inputs (such as constant *buffers*) to render *stuff*.

That being said, each of these graphics components are very tightly coupled with the rendering device. So much so that the device is responsible for creating them.

How am I making these components cross platform? Inheritince? PIMPL? A more sinister third thing?

I am simple controlling what is built by adding compile definitions (e.g. `RADIUM_API_OPENGL`) and through build scripts.

You will see a file called `Interface.h` through which you can interact with all of the various components of the renderer. This is done via selective inclusions and type aliases:

```C++
// interface.h

#ifdef RADIUM_API_OPENGL
# include <renderer/opengl/oglDevice.h>
# include <renderer/opengl/oglBuffer.h>
# include <renderer/opengl/....h>
namespace radium
{
    using RenderingDevice = oglDevice;
    using Buffer = oglBuffer;
    ...
} // radium
#elif defined(RADIUM_API_DX11)
# include <renderer/dx11/dx11Device.h>
# include <renderer/dx11/dx11Buffer.h>
# include <renderer/dx11/....h>
namespace radium
{
    using RenderingDevice = dx11Device;
    using Buffer = dx11Buffer;
    ...
} // radium
#else
# error "Unsupported graphics API!"
#endif 

```

Using this design, If I wanted to add support for Vulkan, the steps would look like this:
1. Add Vulkan code under `/renderer/vulkan`
2. Add type aliases under `/renderer/interface/Interface.h`
3. Add a section to the build script that will compile everything Vulkan related

## Design of the Scene/Scene Manager
TBD

